### DataBases

A Database is a way to store data.  We use DBs for long term and (relatively) short term storage.  Typically your database will communicate with your application(s) over a network.

Imagine we have some web application that allows users to login and post on a personal blog.  This application consists of multiple pieces spread out over multiple machines.  The most straightforward, because we have the most experience with it, is the part of the app that runs on the user's computer in the user's browser (like Cliq).  A second piece is server side (sometimes middleware).  Your computer needs to get the client app from somewhere, and it needs to communicate with another machine to make the full functionality of the client app work.  This other machine is a server, running a Java/Scala/Go/Python/Ruby/JS/... application called a server or webserver.  Both of these pieces, client and server, are applications that don't have any (or much) long term memory.  Neither of them are suitable for storing the users' account information, the text of past blog posts, message history between users, ...neither of them are suitable for storing any of the information the application needs long term.

While we could theoretically just use the standard long term storage for computers (writing to disk), this solution is inadequate in a lot of ways.  Your typical file is a series of bits saved in order on disk.  This means if we want to, for instance, find the password associated with a username, we would need to scan through the file from the beginning, searching for that user.  Also, if users have related information like their account info, their email address(es), multiple sub-blogs associated with them, message histories between them and many other users, ... it becomes very difficult to effectively organize that information just writing to disk.  It becomes even more troublesome to organize your data if you don't want to repeat information.  Every time a user's username, for instance, is repeated throughout the dataset, that is one more location that must be successfully updated each time the user's username changes.

The above problems aren't exhaustive, and they aren't insurmountable either.  In a month and a half, we'll talk about Parquet, which provides very nice organized and efficient storage in .parquet files on disk.

Just some motivating discussion above.  A database is an application that is responsible for efficiently storing and querying your long term data.  Ultimately, the DB does need to write that data to disk, but when we use a DB we interact with the DB using the DB's abstractions, rather than worrying about how exactly the data is written to disk.

What does this mean?  For Postgres, a "relational" database, we store data in records/rows in tables/relations in schema in databases.  Each individual record is a single item of data, the table it is contained in provides the structure to that item of data, and schema and database are levels of further organization that contain tables.  For MongoDB, a "document" (NoSQL) database, we store data in documents contained in collections contained in databases.  Each document is an item of data, potentially containing other items of data.  Collections store related documents and the database is another layer of organization containing collections.

### Note on SQL and NoSQL
SQL is Structured Query Language.  It's a language that lets us communicate with relational databases to store/retrieve/edit data.  SQL looks like this : SELECT name FROM customers;, INSERT INTO customer VALUES (4, 'adam', 'king');, ...  There is a bit more to SQL because of its history.  SQL has been around for a very long time, and is used everywhere.  Because of this widespread use, many other tools support SQL, in addition to relational DBs.

NoSQL, you may hear as "No SQL", as in without SQL, or you may hear as "Not Only SQL".  There are many different types of databases that bill themselves as NoSQL: Mongo stores documents, DynamoDB stores data as key-value pairs, ...  Most NoSQL indeed do not support SQL, though some do.  Typically your NoSQL databases exist to solve some problem that is not well handled by traditional relational databases.

NoSQL vs. SQL isn't really something fundamental about a database.  tech will bill itself as SQL or NoSQL, but ultimately a database is an application for efficiently storing and querying long term data, so your application might support some functionality to that end and might not support other functionality.  (almost) everything you can do in MongoDB you can do in Postgres.  (almost) everything you can do in Postgres you can do in MongoDB.

This NoSQL vs SQL divide is similar to a few other distinctions we make when discussing databases.  We'll see ACID and BASE this week, and the line between them will be similarly blurry.  The CAP Therorem is useful for drawing real distinctions.

SQL and NoSQL better describe tendencies than brute facts about what some database technology is capable of.  A major part of the "tendency" is that SQL databases / relational databases are intended to be used with "normalized" data.  The default assumption when you are using a SQL database is that you will organize your data into a "normal form" (I like at least 3rd normal form).  Normalization provides a quite strict structure for your data.  NoSQL databases do not tend to encourage normalization.  Nested structure within data items is common in NoSQL and almost nonexistant in SQL

